---
title: "3. Advection-Diffusion"
---

## General Formula

The advection-diffusion-reaction equation is defined as

$$
\underbrace{ -\mu \Delta u  }_{ \text{diffusion} }+\underbrace{  \beta \nabla u }_{ \text{advection} } + \underbrace{ \sigma u }_{ \text{reaction} } = f
$$

| Diffusion Coefficient | $\mu$ | Controls spreading/thinning. |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Velocity / Wind | $\beta$ | Controls direction and transport speed. |
| Reaction Coefficient | $\rho$ (or $\sigma$ ) | Controls local growth or decay. |

### The Diffusion Term ($-\mu \Delta u$)

- $\mu$: the diffusion coefficient, measuring how easily the quantity spreads out.
- $\Delta u$: second-order derivatives of the solution. 

> This term describes the **spreading** of the quantity from areas of high concentration $\to$ low concentration due to random motion (e.g. like a drop of ink spreading in still water).

### The Advection Term ($\beta\nabla u$)

- $\beta$: the wind, representing the velocity field (represents the physical movement of the medium)
- $\nabla u$: first-order derivatives of the solution.

> This term describes **transport**, the quantity moving because the medium itself is moving (like smoke being carried by the wind or a leaf floating down a river). 

> [!remark]
> This $\beta$ is often the "troublemaker" term because it **breaks the symmetry** of the problem, making it much harder to solve than simple diffusion.

### The Reaction Term ($\rho u$)

- $\rho$: the reaction coefficient.

> represents a source or sink where the quantity is being created or destroyed locally (like a chemical reaction or a biological birth/death rate)

## Relationship with Poisson Equation

In last chapter, we studied the Poisson Equation 
$$
-\Delta u = f
$$
which is just pure diffusion. By adding the advection ($\beta\nabla u$) and reaction ($\rho u$) terms, the problem becomes significantly more complex to solve numerically.