---
title: "4.3 The Electric Displacement"
---


## 4.3.1 Gauss's Law in the Presence of Dielectrics

Recall: effect of polarization = accumulations of (bound) charges.
$$
\begin{align}
\rho_{b} & =-\nabla \cdot \mathbf{P} \quad \text{ within the dielectric}\\
\sigma_{b} & =\mathbf{P}\cdot \hat{n}  \qquad\text{ on the surface}
\end{align}
$$

The field attributables to
- bound charge
- everything *else*, or so-called "free charge", $\rho_{f}$

Therefore, the Gauss's law reads:
$$\begin{align}
ε_0∇·\underbrace{ E }_{ \text{total field} }   & =ρ   =\underbrace{ ρ_b  }_{ −∇·P }+\underbrace{ ρ_f   }_{ \text{free charge} } \\
\end{align}
$$
and then combine the gardient,
$$\begin{align}
ε_{0}∇\cdot E + \nabla \cdot \mathbf{ P}  &  = \rho_{f} \\
\nabla \cdot(\underbrace{ \epsilon_{0}\mathbf{E}+\mathbf{P} }_{ \mathbf{D} }) & =\rho_{f}
\end{align}$$
where $\mathbf{D}$ is known as **electric displacement**. 

> [!theorem] Gauss's Law for Dielectrics
> Gauss's law is formulated as 
> $$\begin{align}
\nabla \cdot \mathbf{D}  & = \nabla \cdot\rho_{f}\; \qquad (\text{Eq. 4.22}) \\\text{or} \qquad \int \mathbf{D}\cdot d\mathbf{a} & =Q_{f\text{enc}}\;\;\qquad (\text{Eq. 4.23})
\end{align}
> $$
> where $\mathbf{D} = \epsilon_{0}\mathbf{E}+\mathbf{P}$ and $Q_{f\text{enc}}$ = total *free* charge enclosed.

> this is useful for dialectics because only free charges (the stuff we control) are referenced. In practice, we can just get $\mathbf{D}$ even we only know $\rho_{f}$. 


## 4.3.2 A Deceptive Parallel

(need summarization)

## 4.3.3 Boundary Conditions

We can recast BC in terms of ${} \mathbf{D} {}$:

Eq. 4.23 $\to$ discontinuity in the component is perpendicular to an intereface.


Eq. 4.25 $\to$ discontinuity in parallel components.


These BC from $\mathbf{D}$ can sometimes more useful than BC on $\mathbf{E}$.


## 4.3.4. The Crystal ambiguity

> What about an ionic crystal? What is its polarization, $\mathbf{P}$.

(Need Summarization)

