KA-CHE YIP<br>University of Maryland, Baltimore County

In 1928, the newly established Nationalist government faced the formidable task of rebuilding the country after years of political disintegration. The central concern was national strengthening and modernization, and the government embarked on various programs of political, social and economic reconstruction. Medical modernization was part of this process. A study of the Nationalist efforts in this area is crucial to our understanding of the complexity of health developments in modern China since the Nationalist decade of 1928-1937 was the only period in pre-1949 China when a central government was able to assert some measure of control over the nation and preside over the construction of a modern health system. This process would include not only the initiation of new programs but also the consolidation and coordination of efforts on the part of individual reformers and groups. The examination of the evolution of such a system will illuminate a much neglected but important aspect of social and institutional developments in the Republican period. It will also lend historical perspective to the understanding of health developments after 1949. This essay focuses on the development and implementation of rural health programs in the Nationalist decade as well as the factors affecting the establishment of a viable health care system in the countryside. ${ }^{1}$

## Rural Health Conditions in Early Republican China

In the context of early twentieth-century China where more than $80 \%$ of the roughly 450 million people lived in the countryside, the promo-

[^0]tion of public health, by necessity, meant the development of largescale rural health programs which would address directly the massive problems of unsanitary living conditions and the virtual absence of modern health care. Political fragmentation and socioeconomic instability, among other factors, had prevented the systematic development of such programs. By the end of the igios, some Chinese reformers had initiated efforts to improve conditions in the countryside. The emphasis, however, was mainly on educational and economic reforms. James Yen, Tao Xingzhi and others had begun to introduce mass education. In August 1923, the First National Conference of Mass Education Movement was held in Beijing. ${ }^{2}$ Also, by the early 1920s, both the Chinese Communist Party and the Guomindang (Nationalist Party, KMT) pledged to work for radical changes in the countryside as part of the peasant movement and the larger national revolution under the parties' guidance. Nevertheless, in the attempt to effect rapid political and economic changes, little attention was paid to the important issue of rural health.

It was the medical missionaries, with their often isolated clinics and dispensaries in the countryside, who were largely responsible for introducing Western medical practices and public health to the rural population. In 1920, a Council on Health Education which included, among others, the Chinese Medical Missionary Association and the YMCA as its constituent members, was organized to promote public health education through health demonstrations and mass inoculation campaigns. It had, however, a limited impact on the countryside. ${ }^{3}$ It was not until the establishment of a central government under the Nationalists in 1928 that efforts were made to build a modern health system in the country, or at least in areas that the Nationalists directly controlled.

Although there are few reliable statistics on China's rural health conditions in the Republican period, it had been estimated that in the 1920s and 1930s, the mortality rate was 25-30 per 1,000 people while the infant mortality rate was about 250 per 1000 live births. ${ }^{4}$ The

[^1]most common causes of death were such diseases as typhoid, cholera, dysentery, malaria, hookworm, schistosomiasis, kala-azar, smallpox, diphtheria and tuberculosis. Some of these diseases were endemic in certain areas: for example, malaria in the southeast, hookworm in the provinces of Guangdong and Hunan, schistosomiasis in Jiangsu and Zhejiang, and kala-azar in Hubei and Jiangsu.

The prevalence of these diseases was closely related to the unsanitary conditions in the countryside. Most wells were uncovered and were often only a few feet from unprotected latrines. The way human faeces were stored for use as fertilizer in the fields also posed serious health problems. The pits or urns holding the excrement were usually uncovered and became breeding grounds for disease-causing organisms. Most living quarters were cramped and animals sometimes shared these quarters with humans. The distressing consequences of such conditions were exacerbated by the lack of health knowledge among the farming population. For example, the most important reason for the high infant mortality rate was tetanus neonatorium which resulted mainly from the traditional midwives' ignorance of obstetrics and sepsis. These midwives were usually illiterate and untrained in modern techniques. In some areas, mud or cow dung were used to stop the bleeding of the cord at the time of the delivery. Even in areas where modern midwifery had been introduced, the majority of the rural population claimed that modern midwives could not know anything about birth, since most of them were 'both young and unmarried'. ${ }^{5}$

As a matter of fact, modern-trained doctors were still a rarity in large parts of rural China in the i93os and the majority of the rural population depended on practitioners of traditional medicine for medical relief. While traditional medicine has proved to be extremely useful in curing certain diseases, as a group, its practitioners were generally untrained in the diagnosis and nomenclature of communicable diseases which were the scourge of the Chinese countryside. Consequently, there was hardly any prompt and accurate reporting or containment of such diseases. The failure of the traditional physicians in controlling the Manchurian pneumonic plague epidemic of 1910-1911 which exacted a toll of 60,000 lives had indeed changed the attitude of some Chinese toward Western medicine. ${ }^{6}$ The epidemic also led to the establishment of the North Manchurian Plague Prevention Service headed by a Cambridge graduate, Dr Wu Lien-teh.

[^2]However, there was a general lack of confidence in Western medi-cine-except surgery-among the rural population. This attitude had changed little since the early days of the introduction of Western medicine by medical missionaries in the second half of the nineteenth century. One of these missionaries wrote that in cases of 'injury or disease necessitating amputation or the removal of tumours', the work of the medical missionaries had 'inspired a most encouraging confidence'. ${ }^{7}$ Yet in most other aspects, Western medicine was overwhelmingly rejected.

The simple fact is that a sizable portion of the population had no access to even traditional medical practitioners, let alone modern physicians. Few modern-trained doctors wanted to go to the countryside. In 1935, nearly $50 \%$ of them were concentrated in the large cities of the two coastal provinces of Jiangsu and Guangdong. For the whole country, there was roughly one modern-trained doctor per $8 \mathrm{o}, \mathrm{ooo}$ people. ${ }^{8}$ The inaccessibility was compounded by the need for many to travel long distances to health centers. The general poverty of the rural population also meant that many of them could not afford Western drugs. In the 1930s, a farmer could spend roughly 30 cents a year for all kinds of medical relief, but one quinine tablet alone cost 5 cents. It is obvious that most would simply have to do without the benefits of modern medicine even if they believed in them. ${ }^{9}$

## Rural Health and Rural Reconstruction

When the Ministry of Health was inaugurated in October 1928, the Nationalist government issued a mandate stressing the nationalistic theme that the quality of health care was closely linked to 'the prosperity of the race'. ${ }^{10}$ The promotion of public health was seen as part of the efforts to implement Dr Sun Yat-sen's ideals of nationalism-a physically strong people would not be conquered, or worse still, face[^3] national extinction. ${ }^{11}$ This social-Darwinian idea of health was in fact shared by many intellectuals who saw China as a country 'in danger'. ${ }^{12}$ Declaring that the people's health was essential to the welfare of the nation, the government was claiming that medicine was a public function. This is a most significant claim. The logical consequence is to establish central control of health policy and priority, to supervise the practice of medicine, and to provide medical services for all. As will be discussed later, such objectives proved to be difficult to attain.

The close relationship between health protection for the masses and the economic rejuvenation of the countryside was also emphasized. The poor health of the peasants had often been cited as a major reason for the depressed conditions in the countryside, in addition to such other factors as chronic disorder and political disability, the collapse of the rural economy, and natural disasters. Dr J. Heng Liu, a Harvard Medical School graduate who had worked in the Rockefeller Foundation-supported Peking Union Medical College (PUMC) before becoming the health minister from 1929 to 1937, argued that excess deaths and high morbidity rates contributed to low productivity among China's farmers and the collapse of the rural economy. ${ }^{13}$ The promotion of rural health work, he pronounced, was truly an 'urgent task', vital to the success of national reconstruction.

According to Dr Sun Yat-sen's Fundamentals of National Reconstruction, the rebuilding of the Chinese nation depended to a large extent on the successful development of local self-government based on xian (county) reconstruction. In October 1928, the Central Executive Committee of the Guomindang launched the 'seven campaigns' at the xian level to lay the groundwork for local self-government. The campaigns were: public health work, the baojia (neighborhood organization) system, cooperatives, road construction, reforestation, mass literacy campaign, and the promotion of Chinese goods. ${ }^{14}$ These activities were also considered essential to the success of party-spon-[^4]sored mass movements because they would create a 'constructive' relationship between the party and the masses. ${ }^{15}$

Political concerns therefore encouraged increased state involvement in health developments at the basic levels. To medical leaders, there were also practical considerations in promoting a greater role for the state in rural health. The high cost of modern medicine and the general poverty of the people (both of which would require greater government financial contributions), the widespread illiteracy and the lack of health knowledge among the rural population, the predominance of communicable diseases which called for active official intervention and control, and indeed, potential opposition which might necessitate political protection, all pointed to the desirability of some form of state-controlled medicine. As early as the mid-1920s, Dr C. C. Chen, a PUMC graduate and later director of the Health Department of the Mass Education Movement at Dingxian-a xian about 128 miles south of Beijing where James Yen's Mass Education Movement had implemented a program of rural education and economic improvement-and a small group of medical students at PUMC began publicizing the idea of 'state medicine' (gong yi) in articles published in Beijing newspapers. State medicine generally meant 'the rendering available to every member of the community, irrespective of any necessary relationship to the conditions of individual payment of all the potentialities of preventive and curative medicine'. ${ }^{16}$ As Chen explained, when the government provided health care for the entire population, then it could 'promote public health improvements in the countryside as well as in the cities, regardless of individual background and income, and the health problems in the rural areas could be solved'. ${ }^{17}$ C. C. Chen and other medical leaders such as Li Tingan, a PUMC and Harvard School of Public Health graduate and Robert Lim, President of the National Medical Association of China in 192830 , were aware of socialized health services in other countries and they often discussed among themselves the concept of state medicine, ${ }^{18}$ but it was practical concerns and socioeconomic realities in the late ig20s which convinced Chinese leaders of the need for active state intervention in rural health developments. As early as 1928, Dr J.[^5]Heng Liu, then vice-minister of health, recommended that the ministry should try to introduce state medicine on a trial basis in a demonstration area. ${ }^{19}$

Thus, the idea of state medicine as a principle of organizing health care and medical administration was discussed and accepted by many medical leaders, although the actual implementation of this principle proved to be far more difficult. Constraints imposed by the lack of personnel and funds certainly impeded the introduction of public health services in the rural areas. Instead, the medical system was mainly dominated by the urban health structure. This resulted in part from the training and background of the medical leaders and officials in the new health bureaucracy. Most of these Western-trained experts were attracted to the so-called Johns Hopkins model as exemplified by PUMC. The model featured a combination of clinical practice with sophisticated scientific laboratory research. It emphasized curative rather than preventive work and tended to separate the scientific and social role of public health. Such a model inevitably led to a concentration of medical resources in the cities where larger medical schools, hospitals and research facilities were located. In the countryside, except for a few large xian where the local Public Safety Bureau might carry out some public health activities such as sanitation and communicable disease control, there was no machinery to promote public health. Regulations issued by the new Ministry of Health remained unenforceable. ${ }^{20}$ In the first few years of the new Nationalist regime, most of the rural health work resulted from private or local initiatives.

## Private and Local Health Demonstrations

It is clear that the pressing needs of the countryside were preventive work and social medicine. In the 1920s, various experiments in social medicine were launched. Dr John Grant, Chairman of the Department of Public Health at PUMC, set up in 1925 in a ward of Beijing the Peking First Health Station to act as an 'organized core of a regionalized system of community health care'. ${ }^{21}$ It was a demonstra-[^6]tion, on a limited scale, of combining curative and preventive care with the emphasis on the latter-and community involvement in health improvement. ${ }^{22}$ This limited demonstration approach was important as it was later applied to rural health demonstrations. As noted earlier, individual reformers had initiated various rural reconstruction projects with some public health activities, but organized rural health work did not begin until 1929, albeit not by the new Nationalist government. In that year, three organized health centers began their operation: at Dingxian as part of the Mass Education Movement and at Gaoqiao and Wusong, both near Shanghai, with support from the municipal government of Greater Shanghai.

These three centers represented two varieties of rural health demonstrations in the Nationalist period: first, private initiatives with some support from the local government, and secondly, city or xian initiatives with support from other agencies. In the case of the Gaoqiao and Wusong centers, the Shanghai government provided the administrative machinery while the National Shanghai Medical College and the National Tongji University provided the medical expertise. The rationale for these two types of demonstration was similar, however. They were to experiment with introducing modern health care in a limited area with the hope of applying the results to other and larger areas. Each center was staffed by three doctors, several nurses and midwives and one sanitary inspector. Their activities included curative work, communicable disease control, public health publicity, maternity and child health, school health, sanitation and collection of health statistics. There were also some efforts to train public health personnel. But all these activities, however, were still rather limited. ${ }^{23}$

The health work of the Mass Education Movement at Dingxian, with a population of about 390,000 , was far more elaborate and extensive. Begun in 1925, James Yen's Mass Educational Movement promoted literacy, agricultural development, citizenship training and public health. In 1929, in cooperation with the Milbank Memorial Fund, a health department was established to introduce public health work and sanitary improvements. It was first headed by a graduate of PUMC who tried to apply his experience at the Peking First Health [^7]Station to the countryside. ${ }^{24}$ Two years later, the organizational structure of the health work was vastly strengthened when Dr C. C. Chen took over as head of the department. Believing that in rural reconstruction, techniques that were developed must be integrated into the people's lives and successful health improvements required the people's active participation, Chen developed health programs which were based on the utilization of scarce local resources, sound organization and the concurrent improvement of socioeconomic conditions. The health care organization was designed to facilitate the patients' access through the provision of health services at the lowest level. At the village level, health stations were staffed with village health workers-local people who had received some basic training in preventive treatment and simple medical procedures - who were responsible for first aid, vaccinations, reporting births and deaths, health publicity and the improvement of sanitary conditions, especially the construction of drinking wells. The sub-xian health station, usually located at a market town, was staffed with a doctor, a nurse and a dresser. Their duties included daily clinics, preventive vaccinations, supervision of health workers and village midwives and health education. The highest level was the xian health center, located at the xian capital. Acting as the administrative headquarters, it maintained a 30 -bed hospital and laboratory and was also responsible for sanitation and communicable disease control, health education, school health, and the training of physicians, nurses and midwives. The objective was to increase gradually the number of health stations at the village and sub-xian levels so that medical relief and preventive treatments could be readily available to the rural population. ${ }^{25}$ To keep costs low, local resources were used as much as possible. Instead of relying on outside experts who were expensive to maintain, local village health workers were extensively used while school teachers were also trained to take care of minor medical needs and provide guidance and supervision in the school health program. Village health workers charged only i.i cents per treatment, including materials and labor and those requiring hospitalization paid only about $40 \%$ of the average cost per day-about $\$ 1.79 .{ }^{26}$ Prevention was emphasized and extensive public health education through demonstrations and [^8]exhibits was carried out. Textbooks in the People's Schools contained much health information and a school health program was instituted. To reinforce these health measures, drinking wells, public bath houses and pit latrines were built so that health knowledge could be integrated into the people's daily lives.

The Dingxian experiment illustrated the linkage between health improvements and socioeconomic reforms. It must be remembered that public health was only one aspect of the general program of rural reconstruction at Dingxian. As James Yen put it, 'we are trying to develop not just rural education alone, or rural health, or economic improvement, or citizenship, each individually and by itself, but to coordinate and correlate all these various aspects of community improvement and social up-building for the remaking of the Chinese hsien [xian] and the Chinese citizen'. ${ }^{27}$

## Nationalist Rural Health Policies and Programs

Medical leaders in the Nationalist government such as Dr J. Heng Liu and Dr Robert Lim recognized the usefulness but also the limitations of such private and local initiatives. As noted earlier, many of them generally agreed that state medicine and large-scale governmentsponsored national programs of rural health would be necessary. But the new government gave greater priority to political and military programs. Funding for health care was far from adequate. In 1929, only $0.1 \%$ of the total budget went to health services (compared with $42 \%$ for the military). The amounts increased to about $0.2 \%$ in 1931 and $0.7 \%$ in $1936 .{ }^{28}$ With limited funds, the idea of a few demonstration centers along the lines of Dingxian was particularly attractive. New techniques and experiences of the health demonstration would be extended to other xian. Organizationally, the structure of Dingxian's health program also proved to be an important model for the planned rural health service. Beginning in 1929, the Ministry of Health was to adopt a dual approach in building a rural health system: selecting and establishing demonstration centers directly [^9]under the government's sponsorship and drawing up long-term plans for a national health service.

To develop and implement these ideas, the Nationalist government also sought the help of the League of Nations Health Organization. After the Health Ministry was established, it appointed Dr Ludwig Rajchman, Medical Director of the League, as one of the members of its International Advisory Council. In November 1929, a Sanitary Mission from the League led by Rajchman arrived in China as a result of an invitation from the Chinese Foreign Ministry to study the health administration and port health services. The series of exchanges between the Chinese government and the League, together with Rajchman's report to the League in early 1930 formed the basis of collaboration between the two sides. The Ministry of Health proposed to create a Central Field Health Station in Nanjing as the technical headquarters for public health work and the nucleus of an eventual national field health service. At the beginning, the Station would limit its activities to several designated areas in which a network of medical and public health institutions would be set up to serve not only as models but also as training centers for public health personnel. The provincial hospital, located at the provincial capital, would be used as the base to extend public health activities gradually to the xian level. ${ }^{29}$ In November 1931, the Chinese government announced a Three Year Plan to implement some of these ideas. The Central Field Health Station which had begun operation since June 1931 was formally inaugurated in 1932. Besides carrying out technical research in health problems, it also trained public health officers and sanitary inspectors and coordinated the planning of health centers. Since the summer of 1930, Dr Borislav Borcic, former Director of the State Institute of Hygiene at Zagreb, was stationed at Nanjing as the full-time expert of the League to provide technical advice. Later, from 1933 to 1936, Dr Andrija Stampar, another Yugoslav public health leader, was the League's expert in China.

Even before the Three Year Plan was announced, the government had established in January 1931 a health demonstration at Tangshan in Jiangning xian, not far from the city of Nanjing. The Tangshan Rural Health Station was designed to develop health organization at the basic levels applicable to other areas and to train public health personnel. Its work was at first confined to about ten villages with the[^10] town of Tangshan as its center, but it was extended to twenty villages in July $1933 .{ }^{30}$

In Tangshan, the National Health Administration (previously the Health Ministry, now reduced in authority and placed under the Ministry of the Interior) set up a Health Demonstration Office which maintained a clinic staffed by a doctor and two nurses. With the aid and cooperation of various local departments and organizations such as the Public Safety Bureau and Peasant Education Association, the Office tried to improve the sanitary conditions of the villages through the passage of sanitary regulations and the digging of new wells with funds and materials provided by the central government. It organized special classes to train policemen as sanitary inspectors. The Office had a modern-trained midwife to provide pre- and post-natal care, to deliver babies and to set up classes for traditional midwives. School health programs which included periodic health examinations for the students were also begun in the eight local schools. Vaccination campaigns against such common diseases as smallpox and other public health education campaigns were important in arousing the health consciousness of the population. A mobile medical team helped to link the center with the outlying villages. Later, a branch clinic was added several miles from the Demonstration Office.

The Tangshan Rural Health Station was similar to the sub-xian health station of Dingxian. In 1934, the entire Jiangnin xian, with i,600 villages and a population of 450,000 , was designated as a xian health demonstration area modelled after the three-tiered division of health services at Dingxian. Students specializing in rural health in the Government Public Health Training Institute were sent to the xian for practical training. ${ }^{31}$ Significantly, the Central Field Health Station which was closely involved with developments at Tangshan realized that it would be virtually impossible to build the rural health system by extending public health activities gradually to the xian level from the provincial hospital, as the Ministry of Health had originally proposed in 1929. Instead, the Dingxian model of xian-based health centers proved to be far more practical and feasible.

From 1932 to 1934, the National Health Administration took addi-[^11]tional steps to formulate the organizational structure of the national rural health service. In the fall of 1932, a Rural Health Service was organized under the Department of Medical Relief and Social Medicine of the Central Field Health Station to expand the health demonstration program begun at Tangshan and to promote the establishment of xian hospitals or health centers to initiate both curative and preventive activities. ${ }^{32}$ In December, the government reaffirmed, at least on paper, the need to establish public health organs, especially xian health centers or hospitals. ${ }^{33}$ The First National Health Conference, convened by the government and attended by health officials and medical leaders to discuss national health policies, was held in April 1934 and it approved the Central Field Health Station's plan for xian health organizations. ${ }^{34}$ The xian health center, located at the xian capital, was to be equipped with a 40 -bed hospital and was responsible for curative and preventive work for the entire xian. It therefore combined both administrative and technical tasks. The next levels were the sub-xian health stations, serving subdivisions of 50,000 people, while village health stations would serve subdivisions of between 5,000 and 10,000 people. These health organs would be staffed by personnel similar to those in Dingxian, with the village health workers providing the first level of contact with the people. However, local jurisdictions were slow in implementing these plans. In March 1937, the Nationalist Government ordered provincial governments to organize as quickly as possible xian health centers based on this scheme.

## The League of Nations and Rural Health Planning

It can be seen that this was essentially the Dingxian structure which, with its hierarchy of health centers under the xian, formed the basis of state medicine under the Nationalists. As AnElissa Lucas' study has shown, the Chinese medical leaders' formulation of this plan was [^12]significantly influenced by the East European rural health models advocated by the experts of the League of Nations Health Organization, although Dr C. C. Chen has argued that he and others had already developed the idea of a hierarchy of health services in the xian before the League's active involvement. ${ }^{35}$ There were certainly differences between the Chinese plan and some of the East European models. The xian health centers were not welfare centers like the zadrugas in Yugoslavia, nor were the village health workers second grade physicians as the feldshers in the Soviet Union. As Mary Bullock has concluded, the Chinese xian rural health structures 'were circumscribed by the economic and social limitations of the Chinese village, and differentiated so as to diffuse medical care throughout the region'. ${ }^{36}$

A more direct involvement on the part of the League in rural reconstruction was the establishment of rural welfare centers in Jiangxi in 1934. In November 1933, the National Economic Council sent three League experts, Max Brauer, E. Briant-Clausen and Dr A. Stampar, to investigate rural conditions in Jiangxi. The Nationalist Government had just launched its fifth encirclement and suppression campaign against the Communists' central soviet base area two months earlier. The League experts recommended later a rural reconstruction project based on ten Rural Welfare Centers in the province. They would improve the living conditions through providing technical information and support in agriculture, health education and home industries. Politically, it was hoped that this rural rehabilitation program would win the support of the rural population who were recently under Communist control. ${ }^{37}$

The centers were established between August 1, 1934 and January 1936. In each center, there was a rural health station with a doctor, an assistant and a midwife. It had 4-15 beds for emergency cases and operated a daily clinic for people in the area. It would disseminate knowledge of Western medicine and public health. Health and sanitation was promoted through smallpox vaccination campaigns, school health programs and people's organizations as well as through the [^13]construction of model wells and latrines. Laws and regulations prohibiting unsanitary practices were introduced. By March 1936, there were about 42,000 clinic treatments in the centers and 204 wells and 163 latrines had been improved. These activities, it was claimed, would promote 'healthful living in a healthful environment'. ${ }^{38}$

Whilst some Nationalist leaders recognized the need for concrete improvements in the environment as a step toward 'healthful living', Chiang Kai-shek also placed great emphasis on the rural masses' spiritual regeneration as the primary answer to the problems of rural reconstruction. Part of the objectives of the New Life Movement, launched in February 1934 in Nanchang, the capital of Jiangxi, was to mobilize the masses to revolutionize their lives through, among other things, self-improvement. The movement advocated the observance of a strict hygienic code. Personal hygienic habits, physical fitness and cleanliness were stressed. In a government-sponsored publication promoting the movement in the countryside, the author asserted that poor health conditions of the rural population were one of the basic reasons for the 'irrationality' of China's rural life. To rectify this problem, health education and propaganda, clean-up campaigns, the abolition of practitioners of traditional medicine and free health care for all should be implemented. ${ }^{39}$ However, better hygiene and sanitary conditions were deemed as only one part of the total reconstruction of the countryside through spiritual regeneration. The people were urged to cultivate certain traditional Confucian virtues which would imbue them with a new spirit-the spirit of the New Life.

While the attempt to improve personal and environmental hygiene was beneficial to a certain extent to the people in the province, the moral platitudes proved to be less relevant to the immediate socioeconomic needs of the impoverished rural masses. By contrast, the public health activities of the ten Rural Welfare Centers, though limited, were in practice far more useful. By the end of 1934, the New Life Movement, launched with much fanfare at the beginning of the year, had lost its momentum and the task of health improvement in rural Jiangxi was in the main assumed by the health stations in the welfare centers.

Besides these relatively ambitious rural health projects, the Central Field Health Station also helped to initiate health programs in certain xian in the provinces of Anhui, Shandong and Hunan in 1934.
${ }^{38}$ Ibid., pp. 16-19.
${ }^{39}$ Zou Shuwen, Xin shenghuo yu ciangcun jianshe [New Life and Rural Reconstruction] (Nanjing, 1934), pp. 57-61.

Moreover, in February of that year, a Northwest Investigation Team was dispatched to investigate rural health conditions in Shaanxi, Gansu, Qinghai and Ningxia, and in several xians in Shaanxi health centers were established with assistance from the Central Field Health Station. ${ }^{40}$

## Consequences of the Rural Health Programs

All these private and government efforts to promote modern health care in the countryside were far from coordinated. In the fall of 1931, James Yen urged the newly established National Economic Council to coordinate the various rural reconstruction activities in the country. He recommended a comprehensive survey of the existing programs so as to identify the work being done and concrete results already obtained. Based on these data, a blueprint for a national program could be drawn up with the National Economic Council as the agency to coordinate and assign specific rural improvement projects, to bring about a merger of duplicating efforts and to conduct an annual review to determine government financial support. Then a national policy to extend the experience and techniques developed to other appropriate regions should be formulated. For rural reconstruction problems which the Council considered basic but which were as yet neglected, the Council should see to it that they would be taken care of by some existing qualified institution or by the creation of new agencies. ${ }^{41}$ This proposal, however, was not acted upon by the government which, as discussed earlier, had tried to formulate long-term plans for a national health service in the countryside; but before 1937, little coordination had been effected.

An impetus for such coordination did come from the Rockefeller Foundation in 1935. The Foundation, which had been providing support for PUMC and other selected medical education institutions in China, decided in 1935 to launch the China Program to promote rural reconstruction. The following year, the North China Council for Rural Reconstruction was founded to coordinate specific tasks assigned to each of its six members: these included, among others, sanitary engineering at Qinghua University, social medicine at PUMC and the training of university students in public health, agri-[^14]culture, economics and public affairs at Dingxian. ${ }^{42}$ This promising beginning, however, was soon cut short by the outbreak of the SinoJapanese War in 1937.

Despite all these efforts, their actual impact on the country as a whole was limited. In 1936, out of a total of 1,098 xian in 16 provinces, only 181 xian health centers in 12 provinces had been established. Under the centers, there were 86 health stations below the xian level and 91 rural clinics. Compared to a survey of 1934 which found only 17 xian health centers, these figures showed a tremendous improvement. ${ }^{43}$ Yet, it is difficult to assess the extent of preventive and curative work as well as the training of public health personnel carried out in these rural projects. In Jiangxi where the government had invested so much time and energy, it has been estimated that the ten health stations could reach at most 400,000 people, a small fraction of the province's population. In fact, to reach the rest of the population, an additional 292 centers would be needed. ${ }^{44}$

## Limitations of the Health Programs

One reason for the limited success of the government's public health programs was that a lot of such efforts were dependent on politics in the KMT and the Nationalist government. As pointed out earlier, the KMT considered health programs at the local levels to be part of the party's political attempt to extend its control and win the support of the masses. The KMT's program in Jiangxi, for example, was clearly related to the reassertation of control over an area formerly occupied by the Communists. Although the founding of the Nationalist government and the appointment of Dr J. Heng Liu as the Health Minister in 1929 provided the first opportunity since the founding of the Republic to develop a national health system, the Ministry of Health, later the National Health Administration, lacked the political clout and support needed to carry out all of its plans, even in areas under Nationalist control. Dr John Grant, an active participant in the medical modernization efforts had commented that 'the outlook for public [^15]measures on the part of the Nationalist government [was] rather gloomy [because] a great deal of politics of a low order [was] carried on'. ${ }^{45}$ About a year after its establishment, the Ministry of Health was abolished and the National Health Administration, a newly constituted body with reduced power, was placed under the Ministry of the Interior. Although Dr J. Heng Liu retained the position as director of the Administration, he was not convinced of his future independence of action despite verbal assurances from Chiang Kaishek himself and he contemplated resigning from his post. ${ }^{46}$ In the summer of 1933, rumors that Ch'en Guofu, a staunch supporter of traditional Chinese medicine would soon become the Minister of Interior was enough to create panic among the medical modernizers. ${ }^{47}$ In fact, as will be discussed later, respective advocates of modern and traditional medicine feuded over the role of the two systems in China's medical development and the need to placate important political allies in the party or government might have led some KMT leaders to softpedal the push for rapid development of Westernized health care programs in the countryside.

There was also little stability in local health administration. Indeed, an important motive among the medical modernizers in seeking the involvement of the League of Nations Health Organization appeared to be an attempt to ensure stability and continuity in health work. As John Grant explained, 'any new government in China is going to be desirous of international good will, inasmuch as the eventual success of any party will depend upon reconstruction measures, [which] in turn [are] dependent upon loans that must come from abroad'. He argued that any agreements made by the League with any government, including those relating to health matters, would be honored by succeeding ones. ${ }^{48}$

In addition to these political factors, the budgetary allocations for health programs were, as noted earlier, far from adequate. The lion's share of the budget went to military and political programs. The funds for health efforts went directly to the various government health agencies to meet operating expenses and to finance health projects. Health expenditures at the xian level were not much better. In 1936, [^16]only 473 out of a total of 1,098 xian in 16 provinces reported some allocations for health activities and these expenditures amounted to just about $1 \%$ of the total outlays for all the provinces for that year. Moreover, such expenditures varied greatly from province to province: Jiangxi, with an average of $\$ 9,055$ per xian ranked first, while Hubei, with an average of $\$ 172$ per xian was last. ${ }^{49}$

There was also a dearth of effective manpower to staff even this limited number of rural health programs. Most young Chinese doctors were unwilling to abandon the comforts of the cities to serve in the countryside. For example, graduates of Nanjing University and the medical schools were reluctant to work in the depressed areas of Jiangxi. ${ }^{50}$ Many newspaper articles charged that modern-trained physicians had forgotten about their 'social responsibilities to serve the Chinese people'. ${ }^{51}$ As noted earlier, in 1935, nearly half of these physicians were concentrated in the two coastal provinces of Jiangxi and Guangdong and most of them were in the large cities.

To solve the problem of training adequate personnel for the national health service, the Nationalist government had in fact discussed some long-term plans in the early 1930s. However, it was not until 1935, after the Commission on Medical Education was reorganized with financial support from the Rockefeller Foundation, that a program for training health care personnel was finally formulated. The experience of Dingxian proved to be important. Recognizing that the 'majority of the medical demands which the present economic limitations permit of meeting do not require high professional service', the Commission proposed to train the lay public 'to share the responsibility of protecting their own health and that of their neighbors'. ${ }^{52}$ Thus, popular medical education and the training of health aides was to be an essential part of the new medical education. As for the training of professional personnel, the Commission proposed the creation of two separate categories: the first group would be the nurses, midwives, dentists, druggists and sanitary inspectors; and the second group would include physicians, pharmacists and oral surgeons. Postgraduate training for research workers and teachers [^17]and other specialists would also be provided. ${ }^{53}$ Again, the Commission called for the testing of these ideas in a special demonstration area. But most of these plans were never implemented as a result of the lack of funding, political instability and, finally, the outbreak of the war against Japan.

There was, however, a large group of practitioners of traditional medicine whom the government could have utilized in the promotion of rural health care. They had the confidence of the majority of the population. Unfortunately, in almost all the health demonstrations and projects, these traditional doctors were either ignored or rejected. The emphasis was always on promoting scientific medicine which, it was claimed, would eventually replace the 'superstitious practices' in the countryside. ${ }^{54}$ The Ministry of Health's 'Regulations for the Registration of Medical Practitioners' of December 1928 proposed that all physicians-traditional and modern-had to register with the ministry which would determine their qualifications. ${ }^{55}$ As the ministry was dominated by modern-trained experts, traditional doctors and their supporters feared that the regulations would lead to the eventual abolition of traditional Chinese medicine. Throughout the i93os, a bitter and prolonged debate developed between the respective supporters of traditional and modern medicine. ${ }^{56}$ Modern-trained physicians generally rejected any attempts to include traditional medicine in the curricula of medical schools and dismissed proposals to set up short-term courses to train traditional doctors in the rudiments of modern medicine. ${ }^{57}$ The Ministry of Health and its modern medicine supporters were on the whole unwilling to recruit and train the large number of practitioners of traditional medicine in the countryside to promote public health. The only notable exception was the attempt to train some old-style midwives in the basics of modern obstetrics and sepsis. Some supporters of traditional medicine decided to organize their own public health classes but most adopted a negative attitude toward government-sponsored public health activities in the [^18]countryside. ${ }^{58}$ Thus, the opportunity to use this very important group who were generally trusted by the rural population was not actively exploited. Even in Dingxian, a survey in 1933 showed that among the population of about $390,000,67 \%$ relied on traditional doctors for medical relief, and only $4.3 \%$ relied on modern medicine. The rest, or $28.7 \%$, had no access to any kind of health personnel. ${ }^{59}$ These figures underlie the point raised earlier that many in the countryside were still not convinced of the efficacy of modern medicine. Deeply rooted cultural and religious traditions certainly played a part in retarding the spread of modern health care and a fundamental change in the people's view of modern health practices and ideas remained to be a prerequisite for the successful implementation of the health care programs.

In fact, to be effective, the health services must be accompanied by a scheme of general rural reform. It must be an integral part of rural reconstruction which aimed at the improvement of the general socioeconomic conditions in the countryside. Based on his observations in China, Dr Stampar had concluded that 'successful health work is not possible in areas where the standard of living falls below the level of tolerable existence'. ${ }^{60}$ The Dingxian experiment had also demonstrated that the successful implementation of rural health programs involved the introduction of social reforms aimed at altering the behavioral pattern, the socioeconomic system and the living environment of the peasantry. As the above discussion has shown, most Chinese reformers working in rural health programs seemed to be aware of the close relationship between these various components. But comprehensive programs designed to uplift the peasant population as a whole were beyond the capability of individual reformers; it required active government intervention. The Nationalist government, however, was unwilling to make a major commitment to develop and implement a system of rural health care with concomitant socioeconomic reforms. The outbreak of the Sino-Japanese War in 1937 finally destroyed any hope of establishing a viable health care system in the Chinese countryside under Nationalist leadership.

[^19]
[^0]:    ${ }^{1}$ Although the Communists were also developing their own system of health care in areas under their control, their activities, however, are beyond the scope of this essay.
    .0026-749X/92/\$5.00 + .00
    (C) 1992 Cambridge University Press

[^1]:    ${ }^{2}$ Ding Zhipin, Zhongguo jin qishi nian lai jiaoyu jishi [A Record of Educational Events in the Last 70 Years] (Taipei, 1970 reprint), p. 106.
    ${ }^{3}$ For a discussion of the Council's activities, see Ka-che Yip, 'Health and Society in China: Public Health Education for the Community, 1912-1937', Social Science and Medicine 16 (1982), pp. 1198-200.
    ${ }^{4}$ Li Tingan, Zhongguo xiangcun weisheng wenti [The Problem of Rural Health in China] (Shanghai, 1935), p. 24; and Marion Yang, 'Midwifery Training in China', The Chinese Medical Journal 42 (1928), p. 769. It should be pointed out that these figures were generally accepted by advocates of modern medicine, who tended to stress the dismal aspects of China's health conditions.

[^2]:    ${ }^{5}$ New Life Centers in Rural Kiangsi (Nanchang, 1936), p. 18.
    ${ }^{6}$ Carl Nathan, Plague Prevention and Politics in Manchuria, 1910-1931 (Cambridge: East Asian Research Center, Harvard University, 1967), p. 61.

[^3]:    ${ }^{7}$ Harold Balme, China and Modern Medicine. A Study in Medical Missionary Development (London: United Council for Missionary Education, 1921), p. 66.
    ${ }^{8}$ Hsi-ju Chu and Daniel G. Lai, 'Distribution of Modern-trained Physicians in China', Chinese Medical Journal 49 (1935), pp. 544-5.
    ${ }^{9}$ C. C. Chen, 'A Proposed Basic Medical Curriculum', Chinese Medical Journal 49 (1935), p. 862; and Weisheng banyue kan 2, 4 (Feb. 28, 1935), p. 12.
    ${ }^{10}$ The mandate can be found in Min-ch'ien T. Z. Tyau, Two Years of Nationalist China (Shanghai, 1930), p. 263.

[^4]:    ${ }^{11}$ Wu Sungshan, 'Weisheng yundong ti yi-yi yu zhungyao' [The Meaning and Importance of the Health Movement], Zhongyang ribao. Yixue Zhoukan [The Central Daily, Medical Weekly Supplement] 134 (Feb. 16, 1936); and Wu Dingan, 'Difang weisheng xingzheng fan lun' [A General Discussion of Local Health Administration], Jian guo yuekan [Reconstruction Monthly] 3, 3 (July 1930), p. 47.
    ${ }^{12}$ C. C. Chen, Medicine in Rural China. A Personal Account (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989), p. 55.
    ${ }^{13}$ Li Tingan, Zhongguo xiangcun, p. i (preface).
    ${ }^{14}$ Zhongyang dong wu yuekan [Central Party Monthly] 5 (Dec. 1928) and 8 (March 1929).

[^5]:    ${ }^{15}$ Ibid., io (May 1929).
    ${ }^{16}$ R. K. S. Lim and C. C. Chen, 'State Medicine', Chinese Medical Journal 5 I (June 1937), p. 784; C. C. Chen, Medicine in Rural China, p. 53.
    ${ }^{17}$ C. C. Chen, in Weisheng gongbao 2, 2 (Feb. 1, 1930), p. 188.
    ${ }^{18}$ See, for example, Li Tingan, Zhongguo xiangcun, pp. 121-2; C. C. Chen in Weisheng Gongbao, Feb. i, 1930, p. 188; and R. K. S. Lim and C. C. Chen in Chinese Medical Journal, June 1937, p. 780.

[^6]:    ${ }^{19}$ J. Heng Liu, 'The Ministry of Health', in Rockefeller Archive Center, Record Group i, Series 6oo, Box 4, Folder 43, p. 14.
    ${ }^{20}$ Weisheng tongji [Health Statistics] (Zhongqing, 1938), p. 18.
    ${ }^{21}$ C. Seipp (ed.), Health Care for the Community, Selected Papers of Dr. John B. Grant (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1963), p. 94.

[^7]:    ${ }^{22}$ For discussions of the station, see John Grant, 'Department of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Peking Union Medical College', in Methods and Problems of Medical Education (New York: The Rockefeller Foundation, 1929). See also Ka-che Yip in Social Science and Medicine 16 (1983), pp. 1200-1.
    ${ }^{23}$ Li Tingan, 'Summary Report on Rural Public Health Practice in China', The Chinese Medical Journal 48 (1934), pp. 1086-90; and his Zhongguo xiangcun, pp. 96-104.

[^8]:    ${ }^{24}$ See Hsun-yuan Yao, 'The Second Year of the Rural Health Experiment in Ting Hsien, China', Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly Bulletin, X (Jan. 1932), pp. 56-7.
    ${ }^{25}$ C. C. Chen, 'The Rural Public Health Experiment in Ting Hsien, China', ibid., XIV (Jan. 1936), pp. 67-70; see also Li Tingan, Zhongguo xiangcun, pp. 104-114.
    ${ }^{26}$ C. C. Chen, 'Public Health in Rural Reconstruction at Ting Hsien', Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly Bulletin XII (1934), pp. 371, 374.

[^9]:    ${ }^{27}$ Letter from James Yen to Dr Stampar, May 18, 1932, p. 3. In Rockefeller Archives Center: CMB Inc., Box 85, No. 6oo. i.
    ${ }^{28}$ Jia Shiyi, Minguo xu caizheng shi [Supplement to the Fiscal History of the Republic], vol. i (Shanghai, 1932), pp. 46-53; K. Chimin Wong and Wu Lien-teh, History of Chinese Medicine (Shanghai, 1936), pp. 735-7; and Szeming Sze, China's Health Problems (Washington, D.C.: Chinese Medical Association, 1943), p. 15.

[^10]:    ${ }^{29}$ See Proposals of the National Government of the Republic of China for Collaboration with the League of Nations on Health Matters (Geneva, 1930).

[^11]:    ${ }^{30}$ Li Tingan, Zhongguo xiangcun, pp. 81-5.
    ${ }^{31}$ J. Heng Liu, 'National Health Organization', The Chinese Christian Yearbook, 1937, pp. 339, 351-2. See also Lawrence M. Chen, Public Health in National Reconstruction (Nanjing: Council of International Affairs, 1937), pp. 79-81; and Quan Guo Jingji Weiyuanhui compiled, Weisheng Shiyan Chu gongzuo baogao [Report of the Work of the Central Field Health Station] (n.p., 1935), pp. 33-4.

[^12]:    ${ }^{32}$ J. Heng Liu, 'Some Phases of Public Health Work in China', The Chinese Medical Journal 48 (1934), p. 73.
    ${ }^{33}$ Ibid.; also, I. C. Fang, 'Public Health', The Chinese Christian Yearbook, 1932-33, pp. 438-9; and Weisheng tongji, 1938, p. 18.
    ${ }^{34}$ Weisheng tongji, 1938, p. 18; Weisheng Shiyan Chu gongzuo baogao, 1935, pp. 33-4; and J. Heng Liu, 'San nian lai Zhongyang weisheng sheshi kaikuang' [An Overview of Health Programs of the Central Government in the Last Three Years], Weisheng banyue kan 2, i (Jan. 15, 1935), p. 5. See also, J. Heng Liu, 'National Health Organization’, Chinese Christian Yearbook, 1937, p. 351.

[^13]:    ${ }^{35}$ AnElissa Lucas, Chinese Medical Modernization. Comparative Policy Continuities, 1930s-1980s (Praeger, 1982), pp. 71-6. Interview with Dr C. C. Chen, June 3, 1985, at Berkeley. See also J. Heng Liu, 'Health and medicine', Chinese Yearbook, 1935-36, p. 1577.
    ${ }^{36}$ Mary B. Bullock, An American Transplant. The Rockefeller Foundation and Peking Union Medical Colleges (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980), p. 166.
    ${ }^{37}$ New Life Centers in Rural Kiangsi. See also William Wei, Counterrevolution in China. The Nationalists in Jiangxi during the Soviet Period (Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press, 1985), pp. 144-6.

[^14]:    ${ }^{40}$ Weisheng Shiyan Chu gongzuo baogao, pp. 23-38.
    ${ }^{41}$ Letter from James Yen to Dr Stampar, May 18, 1932, pp. 6-7, in Rockefeller Archives Center: CMB Inc., Box 85, No. 6oo. i.

[^15]:    ${ }^{42}$ James C. Thomson, While China Faced West; American Reformers in China, 1928-1937 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1969), pp. 137-42.
    ${ }^{43}$ J. Heng Liu, 'National Health Organization', Chinese Christian Yearbook, 1937, p. 351; and Li Tingan, 'Summary Report on Rural Public Health' The Chinese Medical Journal 48 (1934), pp. 1086-90.
    ${ }^{44}$ William Wei, Counterrevolution in China, p. 146.

[^16]:    ${ }^{45}$ H. S. Houghton: interview with John Grant, April 11, 1927, in Rockefeller Archives Center, CMB Inc., Record Group IV, 2B9, Box 75, No. 529.
    ${ }^{46}$ J. Heng Liu to Roger S. Greene, Nov. 22, 1930. In Roger Greene Papers.
    ${ }^{47}$ John Grant to Roger S. Greene, Aug. 29, 1933. In Rockefeller Archives Center: CMB Inc., Record Group IV, 2B9, Box 75, No. 530; and Greene to Heiser, Oct. 7, 1933, CMB Inc., Record Group IV, 2B9, Box 95, No. 682.
    ${ }^{48}$ Grant to Liu, Dec. 3, 1929, in Roger S. Greene Papers.

[^17]:    ${ }^{49}$ Weisheng tongji, 1938, pp. 25-6.
    ${ }^{50}$ James C. Thomson, While China Faced West, p. 117.
    ${ }^{51}$ See e.g., 'Yixue jiaoyu ti wenti' [The Problem of Medical Education], Zhongyang ribao. Yixue zhoukan 136 (March i, 1936); and 'Zhongguo xin yixue jianshe zhi zhangai' [Obstacles to the Development of New Medicine in China], Dagong bao (April io, 1931).
    ${ }^{52}$ Initial Year of the Medical Education Program. In Rockefeller Archives Center: Record Group i, Series 6oi, Box 3, Folder 27, p. 5.

[^18]:    ${ }^{53}$ Ibid., pp. 29-41.
    ${ }^{54}$ See e.g., New Life Centers, pp. 17-19; and Wu Dingan, Xian weisheng xingzheng (Zhongqing, 1941), p. 2.
    ${ }^{55}$ Xue Jianwu, Zhongguo xiangcun weisheng xingzheng [Chinese Village Health Administration] (Shanghai 1937), pp. 184-266 has most of the regulations issued by the ministry on the practice of medicine.
    ${ }^{56}$ For a discussion of the debate, see Ralph Crozier, Traditional Medicine in Modern China (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1968).
    ${ }^{57}$ 'Lun weishengbu ji yi zhuzhong yishi buxi xiaoyu' [The Ministry of Health Should Stress Supplementary Medical Education], Zhongxi yixue bao [Journal of Chinese and Western Medicine] io, i (July 1929), pp. i-3.

[^19]:    ${ }^{58}$ Chen Guofu, Yi zheng man tan ['Random Jottings on Medical Administration'] (Zhongqing, 1941 ), p. 52; and 'Hangkong jiao guo yu yiyao jiao guo' [Saving the Country through Aviation and Saving the Country through Medicine], Shenbao. Yiyao zhou kan 13 and 14 (March 27, 1933 and March 30, 1933).
    ${ }^{59}$ Li Tingan, Zhongguo xiangcun weisheng, p. ii 13.
    ${ }^{60}$ A. Stampar, 'Observations of a Rural Health Worker', The New England Journal of Medicine 218, 24 (June 16, 1938), p. 994.

